the unexpurgated pike report foreword by
philip AG report of the House Select
Committee on Intelligence 1976
publishers note the pike committee
report includes extensive footnotes the
footnotes are too substantial to be both
included here and maintain the
listenable narrative thus the footnotes
were excluded from this audiobook
version interested listeners can find
them in the original PDF version of the
report available on archive.org 1 the
Select committees oversight experience
if this committees recent experience is
any test intelligence agencies that are
to be controlled by congressional
lawmaking are today beyond the lawmakers
scrutiny these secret agencies have
interests that inherently conflict with
the open accountability of a political
body and there are many tools and
tactics to block and deceive
conventional congressional checks added
to this are the unique attributes of
intelligence notably national security
in its cloak of secrecy and mystery to
intimidate congress and erode fragile
support for sensitive inquiries why is
it effective legislation cannot proceed
in the absence of information respecting
conditions to be affected or changed
nevertheless under present circumstances
inquiry into intelligence activities
faces serious and fundamental
shortcomings even limited success in
exercising future oversight requires a
rethinking of the powers procedures and
duties of the overseers this committees
path and policies its pluses and minuses
may at least indicate where to begin a
access to
information the key to exercising
oversight is knowledge in the case of
intelligence agencies this translates
into a need for access to information
often held by the agencies themselves
about events in distant places it is an
uncertain approach to gathering facts
given the best of circumstances the best
of circumstances thereby become a
minimum condition they select committees
most important work may well have been
its test of those circumstances testing
perhaps for the first time what happens
when Congress unilaterally decides what
it wants to know and how it wants to
know it there were numerous public
expressions by intelligence agencies and
the executive that full cooperation
would be accorded the credibility of
such assurances was important since
almost all the necessary materials were
classified and controlled by the
executive branch despite these public
representations and practice most
document access was preceded by lengthy
negotiations almost without exception
these negotiations yielded something
less than complete or timely access in
short the words were always words of
cooperation the reality was delay
refusal missing information asserted
privileges and on and on the committee
began by asserting that Congress alone
must decide who acting on its behalf
has a right to know secret information
this led to a rejection of executive
clearances or the compartment ation of
our staff the committee refused as a
matter of policy to sign agreements it
refused to allow intelligence officials
to read and review our investigators
notes and avoided canned briefings in
favor of primary source material the
committee maintained that Congress has a
right to all information short of direct
communications with the president our
ability to abide by these policies was a
mixed record on the plus side an
aggressive pursuit of facts and a
willingness to support this pursuit with
subpoenas
perdy
some unprecedented results as an example
never before had either the executive or
Congress put together a ten-year review
of covert action projects by subpoena
which unfortunately had to be taken to
the brink of contempt enforcement the
staff of the committee analyzed all
official covert action approvals since
1965 and reported its results to the
committee and a closed hearing that
presentation was one of the more
interesting and accurate pictures of
u.s. covert policies yet assembled and
was of no small value to our findings
other examples appear throughout the
remainder of this report nonetheless if
that is the positive side it was offset
by the extraordinary efforts that were
required even in a climate favorable to
reviewing past executive conduct to
identify and obtain documents it is a
commentary in itself that subpoenas were
necessary it is a further commentary
that much of the time subpoenas were not
enough and only a determined threat of
contempt proceedings brought grudging
results one delay the record of
subpoenas is worth reviewing it began on
August 5th 1975 when an assistant
secretary of defense was asked to appear
as a witness and bring with him the
document by which the National Security
Agency NSA was set up it was a simple
and logical request the Defense
Department controls NSA the committee
was holding hearings on intelligence
budgets NSA has the biggest budget and
the committee wanted to see the
authority by which the NSA operates the
official did not bring the document he
did not have clearance to for this
elementary piece of information the
Select Committee was forced to resort to
the first of its mini subpoenas it is
worth noting that the subpoena was
promptly honored which raises the
question why the document was not
delivered in the first place
by late August the committee was
preparing for hearings to review
kind of intelligence our money buys for
events were chosen for hearings the 1973
Mideast war the 1974 Cyprus coup the
1974 Portuguese coup and the 1968 Tet
Offensive in Vietnam during August and
early September there were repeated
requests for documents and interviews in
some cases we were given heavily
sanitized pieces of paper sanitized was
simply a euphemism for blank sheets of
paper with a few scattered words left in
often illegible sometimes misleading and
usually inconclusive in some cases
notably as to the 1974 coup and Portugal
there was an absolute refusal to provide
anything as a last-ditch effort with
hearings approaching the committee
turned once more to its subpoena power
on September 10 1975 it subpoenaed
materials from the three major
intelligence agencies and the National
Security Council what were the materials
that forced the committee to resort to
the force of law were they the names of
agents no in fact the committee never
once asked for the names of covert
agents were they descriptions of secret
intelligence techniques no they were
simply copies of intelligence
publications that had been circulated in
the executive branch during the week
preceding the events that we were
examining documents circulated literally
to hundreds if not thousands of people
were they turned over by the date
specified in the subpoena no the three
intelligence agencies supplied bits and
pieces of the publication's dr.
Kissinger an assistant to the president
for national security affairs refused to
turn over a single piece of paper from
reports provided to the National
Security Council during the weeks in
question by the time hearings on
intelligence results began in
mid-september only one agency had
substantially complied with our subpoena
more than a month would pass before a
good faith effort at compliance was
forthcoming from the National Security
Council
to cut off this problem was soon dwarfed
by a new tactic the cut off on September
12 1975 the President or someone using
his name cut off the committee from all
classified information as if that were
not enough his action was accompanied by
a demand that we immediately turn over
all classified materials from our
internal files
the reason the Congress through this
committee had passed judgment after
lengthy deliberation of the merits on
whether forwards classified by the
executive branch could be told to the
American people the executive by its
legally questionable reaction had now
set aside any immediate subpoena
problems and public hearing problems as
well as background hearing on September
11th 1975 had reviewed intelligence
performance with respect to the Mideast
war in 1973 the result was shocking and
the words of a CIA document quote the
principal conclusions concerning the
imminence of hostilities reached and
reiterated by those responsible for
intelligence analysis were quite simply
obviously and starkly wrong and quote
that same document had verbatim quotes
from two intelligence bulletins that
were moderately favourable and from five
bulletins demonstrating that
intelligence estimates were
embarrassingly wrong the two favorable
quotes were Declassified and read into
the record the five embarrassing quotes
containing the same type of information
were not Declassified by CIA the
committee objected the CIA returned that
afternoon to report that after all the
five quotes could be declassified
however in an apparent need not to
appear arbitrary in their earlier
decision they still insisted that some
13 words still remain classified the
committee debated those 13 words for
over four hours in a closed session the
CIA special counsel was present
and in telephone contact with CIA
director Colby the head of the State
Department's intelligence and research
was there the head of the Defense
Intelligence Agency was there and a high
official of the National Security Agency
was there no agency was without
representation and all had a chance to
speak nine words were mutually agreed to
remain classified but four words were
not the four remaining words could not
reveal any secret sources and methods
which is the basis of official
classifications because the information
they contained could have come from any
number of sources in addition the
intelligence was so old by the time it
was reported that it could not reveal
how rapidly our intelligence techniques
operated the committee satisfied itself
on these and other points before taking
some half dozen roll call votes on the
matter it is possible that never before
had so much expertise and thought gone
into a declassification decision for
this the committee was accused of being
irresponsible to protect national
security the president invoked a cut-off
perhaps before the president ever heard
of what was going on the committee later
learned that in a biography of dr.
Kissinger a year earlier the subject to
which the four words referred had been
spelled out in great detail so much for
the validity of the classification
argument no high State Department
official had been cut off from
information more forced to turn over his
files as a result of that earlier
publication so much for protecting
against irresponsibility police guarding
committee offices were instructed to
prevent any takeover of files by the
executive and nothing more was heard of
that nevertheless the cutoff from
information struck at the heart of
committee operations one month out of
our five month investigative period was
lost while the issue was negotiated with
little choice the committee agreed that
for purposes of getting the
investigation underway again future
disputes would be referred to the
president
this was agreed to on the assurance of
the president that the committee would
have no further problem with access to
information it is perhaps significant
that the day the committee was cut off
was also the day hearings were scheduled
on the 1974 Cyprus coup hearings were to
be focused on the State Department's
handling of intelligence and of dr.
Kissinger's role there in those hearings
had to be cancelled however the
committee located a State Department
witness who was eager to testify about
Cyprus even in the absence of classified
evidence from the executive his name was
Thomas boy at Thomas boy at was the
State Department officer in charge of
the Cyprus desk during the period in
question the committee was interested in
what kind of intelligence had been
supplied to boy OTT regarding the 1974
coup against Archbishop Makarios and the
consequent Turkish invasion more
important the committee wanted to
examine how that intelligence as well as
mr. boycotts analysis of it was handled
by decision-makers at state mr. Boyett
had in fact advised the committee staff
that he vigorously criticized the
handling of intelligence at the time of
the Cyprus crisis this criticism was
embodied in a written report which was
sent through the state department's
dissent channels and it led to a whole
new series of problems three silenced
witnesses in response to the committee's
interest in Thomas boycotts intelligence
critique a new tactic was fashioned the
silenced witness on September 22nd 1975
mr. Boyett was ordered by the State
Department not to tell the committee
quote information which would disclose
options considered by or recommended to
more senior officers in the department
end quote the order was added on to the
existing ban on classified information
that was not the end
anything mr. Boyett did say would have
to be in the presence of State
Department monitors by order of the
secretary it is worth pointing out that
this prohibition extended to
than mr. Boyd's options or advice any
information that would disclose those
options was also banned an attempted
interview by the staff with monitors
demonstrated that this covered almost
everything the man ever did or said the
State Department's order was issued in
spite of two United States laws which
protect and guarantee the right of a
federal employee to provide information
to Congress one statute says that the
right of a federal employee quote to
furnish information to either house of
Congress or to a committee or member
thereof may not be interfered with or
denied end quote
the second law which directly bears on
the boycott situation was specifically
designed to encourage candid testimony
of employees from federal agencies
including the Department of State the
authority invoked by the Secretary of
State was neither classification nor
executive privilege but a new doctrine
that can best be characterized as
secretarial privilege the secretary of
state was demanding special treatment if
this committee could not have received
testimony from CIA officers or FBI
agents about advice or options they
presented to senior officials it would
have no choice but to shut down
oversight would be dead
fortunately the CIA the FBI and other
intelligence agencies had either not
heard of secretarial privilege or did
not believe it existed on October 2nd
1975 the committee voted to issue a
subpoena for mr. Boyd's Cyprus critique
dr. Kissinger responded on October 14
1975 referring to the subpoena as a
request it was denied even though it was
not a request but a legal order to
produce a document time and Control are
as we noted at the outset in the hands
of those who have possession of
documents therefore the committee more
than one month after issuing its
subpoena accepted from mr. Boyett no
testimony and no document but something
less we were given mr. Boyett
memo after it had been mixed into a
number of other paragraphs drafted
elsewhere in the State Department
ostensibly to protect mr. Boyett it
ended up very much like the proverbial
riddle wrapped in a mystery inside an
enigma
this time the euphemism was an amalgam
for flank attack on September 24th 1975
two days after written instructions to
mr. Boyett were issued the Deputy
Secretary of State raised for the first
time an innuendo that the committee's
actions resembled McCarthyism the
committee's initial reaction was to
dismiss any such inference as a
temporary lapse into poor taste
unfortunately it was not a temporary
lapse the next day on September 25th
1975 deputy secretary Eagleburger
appeared before the committee to explain
the boycott order his statement again
referred to State Department employees
problems with Congress and past times a
clear reference to the McCarthy period
of the 1950's as his subsequent
testimony made clear on October 14 1975
dr. Kissinger's written response to the
subpoena of boy outs intelligence
critique again raised a reference to
McCarthyism the implication was baseless
as both mr. Eagleburger and dr.
Kissinger admitted under questioning
facts seemed to make no difference
within days of the innuendo being raised
by dr. Kissinger and his deputy
newspaper columns and editorials were
reporting their charges of McCarthyism
to the extent that such media activity
may have been inspired directly or
indirectly by the State Department
it helped erode support within and
outside the committee for pursuing the
plain truth with that erosion the
fiction of an amalgam became feasible
someday the full story of Cyprus may be
told but not by this committee if no
flank attack was launched by the FBI to
discredit the committee it may have been
because one was averted by the committee
on October 9th 1975 mr. Martin Kaiser
a manufacturer of wiretap equipment
testified before the committee he
indicated that the FBI bought his
equipment through a middleman u.s.
recording company who added a 30% markup
there was no justification for the
markup and it later developed that the
president of US recording and a top FBI
official were close friends the
committee began an investigation of u.s.
recording and its FBI friends the
Justice Department and FBI later began
their own probe of the same matter on
December 23rd 1975 two and 1/2 months
after mr. Keyser testified he was
subjected to a 6-hour interview by two
FBI agents the agents were allegedly
carrying out an internal FBI
investigation regarding the agency's
contractual dealings with US recording
company mr. Keyser called the committee
to relay his concern and offered to give
a statement under oath as to the conduct
of the FBI agents in a committee
deposition of December 30th 1975 Kaiser
claimed that the FBI agents were more
concerned with discrediting the
committee's inquiry and personnel than
conducting their investigation of us
recording ultimately the agents had
elicited from him a statement written by
an FBI agent which in some insignificant
details recanted portions of his
testimony mr. Kaiser subsequently
repudiated that written statement which
he had signed while agents stood over
him and thrust it in front of him taking
the initiative the committee on December
31st 1975 released a copy of the written
statement a full copy of mr. Kaiser's
December 30th 1975 deposition and the
text of a letter to the Attorney General
demanding a full explanation of the
entire incident this was done to head
off any FBI leak of the statement its
agents had taken while Kaiser was under
some duress five deletions in early
November about the same time as the boy
at problems were being resolved the
committee moved on from the subjects of
money and what our money buys the third
topic of its hearings was risks and how
well those risks are controlled seven
new subpoenas were issued four were for
materials pertaining to subjects of
prior hearings they were honored the
remaining three were directed to dr.
Kissinger for materials pertaining to
upcoming hearings not surprisingly those
subpoenas went unanswered once again
some background is helpful two of the
three subpoenas were for covert action
recommendations made by non CIA
officials since the CIA had already
opened up its covert action files to us
the third subpoena was for intelligence
records on Soviet compliance with
strategic arms limitation agreements
salt when considering risks covert
actions ranked as perhaps the highest
risk operations in the government short
of war the law allows the CIA quote to
perform such other functions and duties
related to intelligence affecting the
national security as the National
Security Council may from time to time
direct end quote this is the legal
authority for covert action a
subcommittee of the National Security
Council presently called the Forty
committee has been assigned the task of
directing these actions by tracing money
the committee came across millions of
rounds of ammunition and weapons being
purchased in the early 1970s these
purchases were destined for questionable
military venture and a
far off war that most Americans had
never heard of much less felt they had
any national interest in the CIA's
military escapade was bad enough but on
examining documents the committee
discovered that the 40 committee
appeared not to have met or voted on the
operation in fact internal documents
showed that the CIA and the State
Department had turned the project down
three times in the previous two years it
turned out that during a trip overseas
President Nixon and dr. Kissinger had
met alone with the head of a foreign
government at that man's request the
administration had involved CIA and an
internal war in the head of State's
neighboring country John Connolly on the
verge of heading Democrats for Nixon was
sent back to the foreign leader
apparently to bring him the good news of
final approval a month later after
training for the project had already
begun forty committee members were sent
a memo by dr. Kissinger informing them
for the first time of President Nixon's
decision in a separate matter this
committee was told by former CIA
director Richard Helms of a decision to
undertake a covert action project in
Choi mr. Helms had been called into the
Oval Office and told by President Nixon
with dr. Kissinger and mr. John Mitchell
present that he was to undertake the
project in spite of CIA reservations he
was also told quote not to inform the
other members of the Forty committee and
quote a pattern was emerging not all
covert actions were generated by the CIA
in particular paramilitary operations of
the worst type seemed to come from
outside the CIA some projects came from
the president some projects came from
his assistant for national security
affairs and some had their beginning in
the Department of State for tea
committee records were subpoenaed to see
if the pattern was valid the subpoena
was limited to the official document by
which a covert action was approved these
records were often no more than one
paragraph long
what arrived in response to our subpoena
showed nothing because it was mostly
deletions the deletions came in all
shapes and forms typically there would
be one line left on a page saying quote
a CIA project was telephonically
approved in quote or quote the committee
voted to approve a CIA paper entitled
title deleted end quote often if there
had been numerous items considered at a
meeting the deletions themselves had
been cut and pasted together for example
item 8 might follow item 1 giving the
impression that only two items had been
considered that day sometimes there
would be only one word left on a page
chillie nothing else anywhere but it was
still classified top secret the
information needless to say was
worthless wholesale deletions were
encountered in the committee's
investigation of domestic covert
activities as well COINTELPRO the FBI's
program for disruption of the new left
like nearly all FBI actions was
extremely well documented the committee
requested the appropriate documents in
July what it received were summaries so
heavily excised as to be unusable one
memorandum for example referring only
generically to the new left contained
the subheading recommended procedure on
one page and results on the next the
pages were otherwise blank another
document with the same type generic
reference blank extremist organization
was likewise excised in its entirety the
committee protested negotiations
followed finally in mid-october an
agreement was reached whereby less
excised memos were made available to
committee staff at FBI headquarters the
committee persisted selecting a
representative number of memoranda to be
delivered to its own offices after some
delay they were delivered still excised
requests for the documents pertaining to
FBI and national security wiretaps
led to a similar experience one set of
documents was delivered excised beyond
use negotiations took place for almost a
month
finally a second set of documents was
provided but again without identifying
targets of electronic surveillance six
privileges
the second Kissinger subpoena brought
even less than the first one for the
first time in the history of the Ford
administration executive privilege was
invoked the subpoena which caused this
historic assertion was directed to dr.
Kissinger as Secretary of State it was
intended for the purpose of examining
the type of covert actions recommended
by the State Department since 1965 the
State Department reported that it had
recommended only eight projects this was
later changed to 16 and still later to
20 but that none of the documents could
be provided to the committee although
only a few of the recommendations were
from a secretary of state to a president
all documents were being withheld
because they were deemed privileged
communications with presidents they
included recommendations from lessor
state officials to the staff of the
National Security Council with no
apparent intention that the document be
for the eyes or the use of the president
in all cases the communication did not
take place in this president's
administration all privileges recognized
by law are controlled specifically and
personally by the person whose
communication is being protected and
this president was not in that position
as to the documents it must be noted
again that no other intelligence agency
of Department withheld recommendations
for covert action or anything else sent
to the National Security Council if they
had the committee's work would have come
to a halt in any event nothing came
forth from the State Department at no
time was there a legitimate question as
to which documents the committee was
seeking under either this subpoena or
the subpoena for 40 committee documents
at no time was the physical amount of
paper a problem since only a few hundred
sheets of pay
were at issue at all times this
committee as well as the Congress had a
right and in fact an obligation under
law to review the information at issue
with no other recourse the committee
cited dr. Kissinger for contempt on
November 14 1975 on November 20th 1975
the committee approved a report to the
House of Representatives asking that the
committee's contempt citation be
supported by the house itself and
referred to the US Attorney for
prosecution contempt proceedings began
to produce results with respect to the
40 committee records revised editions
with fewer deletions were soon provided
nothing came forth from the State
Department
the committee then entered its last two
weeks of hearings having endured more
than three months of uninterrupted
delays cut-offs silenced witnesses
amalgams attacks deletions and
privileges finally the evening before
the committee was to take a contempt
citation of dr. Kissinger to the floor
of the house for a vote the committee
was given access to state department
recommendations for covert action seven
more delay the third so-called kissinger
subpoena was intended for the review of
strategic arms limitation agreement salt
Intelligence handling but brought
instead a return to the delay what is
salt and why was the committee so
interested in the intelligence aspects
of it briefly salt covers the strategic
arms limitation agreements signed with
the Russians in 1972 to limit the arms
race the agreements specifically limit
such things as missile production
deployment and testing by the United
States and the Soviet Union the ability
of our intelligence services to detect
whether the Russians are violating this
agreement is of vital strategic interest
more important salt intelligence must be
able to move through channels
uninfluenced by bias or ulterior motives
to appropriate decision-makers
the committee had earlier received
testimony that during the Vietnam War a
desire to please high-level officials
may have caused some intelligence to
reflect what the upper levels wanted to
hear Vietnam is history but salt is not
to check how intelligence was being
handled at the highest levels and
whether it was ever withheld from top
executive officials or Congress the
committee subpoenaed all reports on
Soviet compliance that had been sent to
the National Security Council at first
committee staff went to the White House
and was given a few salt monitoring
reports these it was said were
absolutely all that the National
Security Council had in its files on the
subject of salt compliance it did not
seem possible for one reason
the verification panel which exists
primarily to review salt matters as part
of the National Security Council and has
been quite active for another the
committee had already identified dozens
of pertinent documents from the
intelligence community which had been
sent to the National Security Council
the skepticism proved accurate after
committee proceedings to cite dr.
Kissinger for contempt of the salt
subpoena on November 14 1975 volumes of
salt intelligence material began to come
forth a week had passed since the return
date of the subpoena before the
documents the committee needed were even
identified making preparations for
hearings most difficult this was the
last of the subpoenas however in
reviewing the oversight experienced
access to information even when it was
backed up by subpoena was not
satisfactory as an example at the State
Department we found that lower-level
officials had eventually been ordered
not to testify before the committee
their documents were likewise refused to
Congress upper level officials at state
have become inaccessible because of
executive privilege and diplomatic
exchanges an important element of
intelligence were similarly off-limits
to the committee to place the importance
of this in perspective
telogen s-- has two primary consumers
military and diplomatic diplomacy is
preferable to war yet it is nearly
impossible today to evaluate how well
intelligence serves diplomatic ends if
it does not serve well it is hard to
imagine how anything could be known or
done about it by Congress the passion
for confidentiality and secret at state
is curious because in many cases the
Russians and other adversaries were
either directly informed of the same
secrets the committee sought or the
Russians knew of them by other means it
is hard to imagine a justification for
allowing the unelected to keep elected
officials in the dark in a democracy 8
routine problems when legal proceedings
were not in the offing the access
experience was frequently one of
foot-dragging stonewalling and careful
deception a few examples should suffice
the president went on television June
10th 1975 and reassured the nation that
the uncompleted work of the Rockefeller
Commission would be carried forward by
the two intelligence Committees of the
Congress the files of the Commission
President Ford announced would be turned
over to both committees immediately the
committee began requesting those files
within the week we requested and
requested we negotiated finally by
threatening to announce publicly that
the president's word had not been kept
the files were turned over in
mid-october some four months late in
another case likewise involving basic
research information the committee in
early August requested a complete set of
what has become known as the family
jewels this 693 page document was the
very foundation of the current
investigations it had come into
existence as the result of an order by
former CIA director James Schlesinger on
May 9th 1973 and the wake of Watergate
revelations dr. Schlesinger had ordered
CIA employees to report any possible
past
wrong doing and those reports were
compiled into the joules on May 21st
1973 by the end of August the committee
had been provided only a sanitized
version of the document letters were
sent and negotiations proceeded
throughout September on October 7th 1975
the staff was told that they would not
be allowed to see the complete record of
wrongdoing as assembled in May 1973 a
second sanitized version was sent in
mid-october but it was hardly less
sanitized than the first as an
interesting sidelight the second version
did have one page that was not in the
first it was a photocopy of a Jack
Anderson newspaper article nothing more
in the first version that page had been
blanked out with the message this
information deleted because it reveals
sensitive operational techniques and
methods the second version was not
deleted but it was classified
the Chairman demanded a complete copy of
the report and was told that one would
be forthcoming none was as a result he
scheduled a press conference for 12:00
noon on October 11 1975 at 11:45 a.m. on
October 11th 1975 the report was finally
delivered after the life of the
committee's investigation was more than
half over these two examples represent
some of the most basic research
materials available to the committee
their contents were crimes abuses and
questionable conduct not sophisticated
or legitimate intelligence secrets other
important information was withheld such
as a committee request for certain
records of the president's foreign
intelligence advisory board on August
25th 1975 a letter was sent asking for a
copy of the board's agendas since 1961
no written response to that letter has
ever been received the board interested
the committee from the standpoint of
command and control there have been
numerous recommendations for example
a pending executive reorganization make
this group the key command and control
unit for foreign intelligence the
committee is still waiting for the
board's documents to be delivered
despite the fact that the ranking
minority member of the committee took a
personal interest in the matter a month
of his efforts produced only a limited
right to see certain information not the
documents themselves another important
piece of information the committee
requested was the names and
relationships of news men who worked for
both the CIA and the American news media
at the same time congressman Dellums
asked for this an executive session on
August 6th 1975 the information was
re-request advisor on october 14 1975
and on october 16 1975 and on october
21st
1975 and on October 22nd 1975 the
committee is still waiting for answers
about the news men the only information
it did receive was in response to
inquiries about specific news man after
we had determined from other sources
that there was a CIA connection in fact
in one case the CIA denied the
relationship until confronted with
irrefutable proof as a final example
there is a category of intelligence that
is sent to the Secretary of State who
then controls its further dissemination
it is called notice Cherokee he
specifically requested notice Cherokee
information with reference to the Cyprus
crisis in 1974 it was told that none
existed two months later other officials
revealed that the materials do exist
when the committee went back to state
with this new information
it was simply told notice Cherokee was
not going to be given to us by then
there was no time left to issue a
subpoena
hey the right question perhaps the most
problem in developing information about
intelligence activities is knowing the
right question to ask as an illustration
committee staff obtained the names of
CIA proprietaries after lengthy
negotiations sometime later staff
members noticed that certain names were
not on the list the explanation was that
those were fronts and we had not asked
for fronts nor was this sort of semantic
contest confined to staff inquiries in
one public hearing congressman Stanton
and the FBI's Raymond when all consumed
more than five minutes drawing
distinctions among surreptitious entry
burglary and illegal break in five
minutes compares favorably with the
weeks it took committee staff to obtain
precise answers to the difference
between FBI informants and confidential
sources another example grew out of a
committee investigation of a covert
action project that had taken place some
years ago this particular project was
the subject of unusual interest by the
committee both because of the country
involved and because it entailed
tampering in the free election of an
allied nation the committee's objections
to the project were strong enough that
it voted to recommend to the president
that the project no longer be kept
secret astonishingly while the committee
was in the midst of objecting to this
past project CIA was obtaining approval
for reinstituting the same type of
project in the same country the CIA
never told the committee about this
renewal when newspaper revealed the new
project committee staff asked the CIA
why it had not been told the response
was you didn't ask the right question
time and again a question had to be
repeated and variously repeated only
then would the sought-after facts emerge
even though the intent of the questions
had been readily apparent the operable
ground rules were as one official put it
quote after all we're not a Coke machine
you don't just put in a quarter and
expect something to come out
end quote examples of the difficulty in
asking the right question are a bit like
trying to prove a negative the full
impact may not be possible to illustrate
it was however the most nagging factor
and attempting to exhaust the items that
deserved congressional insight the
significance of that is that it reflects
an attitude which cannot be expected to
change and as long as that is the case
ready access to documentary evidence and
primary source material is all the more
imperative be Congress and the secrecy
dilemma classified information presents
a classic paradox without it government
sometimes cannot function with it
government sometimes cannot function spy
agencies cannot publish details about
their operations at the same time
Congress cannot fail to report to its
constituents about abuses of their
government what it all means is that
there must be a responsible system of
classification accompanied by an equally
responsible and effective system of
declassification we have neither it has
been easy to create secrets but this
government has yet to construct an
adequate way to handle the problems too
many secrets create we have no Official
Secrets Act which would make it a crime
to publish secrets because such a law
would be unconstitutional therefore the
only real enforcement of classification
is sanctioning those who depend on
access to secrets such as Congress
Congress can be and has been either cut
off from classified information or
convinced to receive secrets selectively
this is only the beginning of
classification problems the law says
that there are to be only three
categories of classification top secret
secret and confidential in spite of this
intelligence agencies spawn all sorts of
higher classification such as code word
or compartment cat
just as often information is simply
withheld from Congress under ad hoc
arrangements this committee was
frequently told that whereas its mandate
was legal authority to receive
classified information that was not
enough one oaths and agreements the
first matter of business between the CIA
and the committee was a request by the
agency that all of the staff be required
to sign six pages of CIA oaths these
elaborate oaths stipulated in effect
acceptable conduct for congressional
employees with respect to things CIA had
determined or secret without oaths
secrets would not be forthcoming the
staff represents of course committee
members but the members were not asked
to sign oaths perhaps this was because
members would not do anything untoward
with secrets more likely it was because
they would protest loudly about signing
executive oaths the committee reminded
CIA that subjecting our employees to
executive oaths would violate the
concept that Congress is an independent
and co-equal branch of government it is
the constitutional responsibility of
Congress to control its own staff and
this is the course the committee
followed it required every employee to
sign a statement drafted by the
committee reflecting the needs and
considerations of the Congress and
enforced by Congress this may seem like
so much posturing but it is important
not to underestimate the significance of
firmly establishing the premise that a
target of an investigation does not lay
down ground rules as the agency noted
this has not been the case in the past
and it may be one of the reasons this
investigation had become necessary the
next move was to require the committee
to enter into agreements the proposed
agreements outlined certain categories
of information so sensitive that the
committee was to agree in advance not to
see them when this was rejected a
modified version of those agreements set
forth proposed rules and regulations the
committee would abide by
if certain classified information were
to be made available these agreements
also included a proposal to compartment
our staff compartment
them up and restricting their access to
each other's work the committee refused
to sign it refused even to agree as a
matter of understanding that executive
rules would be binding such proposed
understandings included allowing
intelligence officials to review the
notes of investigators before notes
could be brought back to committee
offices other committees have
consistently been subjected to that
arrangement the FBI proposal was even
more restrictive than CIA's secret
documents would be made available in
special rooms at the FBI with FBI
monitors present notes would be reviewed
by FBI agents after notes had been
appropriately sanitized they would be
sent to our offices
once again the committee refused to sign
it did agree orally to put all future
requests for documents in writing the
repercussions of this oral agreement
illustrate quite nicely the problem with
agreement a few days later the committee
received a letter from the Justice
Department stating that requests for
materials that had been made a month
earlier by committee members and public
hearings had not been fulfilled even
though FBI officials had publicly agreed
to furnish the documents promptly the
requests had not been in writing while
the committee was negotiating an end to
the cut off from classified information
another agreement for handling secrets
was proposed by the executive the
committee was asked to agree that
certain categories of information be
inaccessible other categories would be
available only to senior members by
means of selective briefings again it
was not agreed to to selective briefings
soon after the opening hearings staff
began investigating a high-risk secret
program a request was made to interview
the official in charge of the program
the interview was granted but the
official refused to talk
about the program he sat with a thick
book of documents but he refused to let
any documents be reviewed they were
quote to secret end quote
intelligence officials made a proposal
the committee would hear again and again
the chairman and perhaps the ranking
minority member could be briefed on the
program in light of the fact that the
committee had been told that clearances
or secrecy categories would not be used
to block the staffs work it protested
when the Chairman refused to be briefed
alone intelligence officials were
Lintott and allowed staff to have access
to the information so long as the
chairman was briefed first a second
example illustrates the problem with
selective briefings the committee
inquired into a project that included
foreign military assistance via the CIA
it was too sensitive to discuss with
staff once again intelligence officials
asked to brief the Chairman and senior
members the full committee and staff
were briefed and the consensus was that
the project had turned out to be one of
the more outrageous ventures by CIA some
months later this same project was the
subject of a committee action to ask the
president that the full story be made
public a recent CIA operation in Africa
followed the same awkward course of
senior member and senior staff briefings
first then full and prompt disclosure to
the committee this committee
consistently maintained this policy that
everything told to senior members was
promptly told to the full committee if
Congress wanted a one or two man
committee it had every opportunity to
set one up it has not done so to date
preventing this from happening de-facto
was and is a serious challenge three
special restrictions committee members
are not the only object of secrecy
arrangements proposed by intelligence
officials other members of Congress
apparently cannot be trusted with secret
information about the government they
govern time and again staff was told
that it would be difficult to turn over
documents because of rule
seven rule 11 is a house rule that
allows members of the House of
Representatives to have access to all
quote committee hearings records data
charts and files end quote
despite committee rules protecting
against dissemination of materials to
other members the committee was asked to
sign letters affirming that it would not
turn over documents to another member of
the House the committee was eventually
asked to pass a resolution to that
effect
sometimes this acted to delay the
forwarding of documents the primary
result was that most materials the
committee received in the closing months
of its investigation were quote on loan
end quote
the concept of loaning materials to the
committee had other advantages for the
intelligence community the first
advantage was the right to possession
and control of final disposition of our
files without a loan arrangement staff
was told that certain papers could not
be provided the other advantage in
loaning documents pertained to a
possible Court contest over release of
classified information if release of a
document were going to be legally
disputed the executive clearly wanted to
be in the position of having legal
possession of that document
unfortunately release or publication of
committee information raised far more
immediate and practical problems for the
release of information one of the most
troubling problems the committee faced
was what information to release and what
process to follow and making its
decision a corollary problem was what to
do about unauthorized release of
information existing standards for
classifications are vague arbitrary and
overused almost anything can be a source
or method of intelligence which are the
primary criteria for foreign
intelligence classifications as a result
the sources or methods byline is used to
classify items that have practically no
bearing at all on intelligence but are
extremely embarrassing
overuse of classifications is inevitable
when by the executives most recent
estimate some fifteen thousand four
hundred sixty-six persons can classify
information the difficulty is that no
one in Congress can declassify the
executive branch claims exclusive and
sole jurisdiction this gives an
administration the power to use the
classification system in a manner that
can result in manipulation of news by
declassifying information that can be
used to justify policy while maintaining
classification of information that may
lead to contrary conclusions another
aspect to be recognized is the
classification can hide conduct from the
American people that is well known to
the foreign country involved Castro knew
of the assassination attempts the
Cambodians knew they were being bombed
but the American people whose government
was engaging in these practices were not
aware of the activities because of the
classification system the dilemma arises
when a congressman or committee receives
information which one or the other
decides should be brought before the
people they represent this committee
faced that problem and did not reach a
satisfactory solution the procedure
followed by the committee was that when
it was decided to consider making public
certain information taken directly from
classified documents or testimony it
would give appropriate executive branch
officials 48 hours notice it would then
allow those officials to appear before
the committee in closed session and
present arguments against release of all
or part of the information if no
agreement could be reached the materials
at issue would be forwarded to the
president they would be released unless
the president asserted personally and in
writing that release would be quote
detrimental to the national security and
quote the committee used this process
with three separate pieces of
information
all three were covert CIA projects their
release was proposed in separate motions
placed before the committee by
congressman Johnson the initial Johnson
motions were entered
used in November 1975 and voted down by
the committee with five members not
present some weeks later the motions
were made again with all but one member
present and approved by the majority
this began the release of information
process the next step was to draft a
short statement outlining these
significant aspects of each covert
operation the statements were forwarded
to the special counsel to the Director
of Central Intelligence with an
accompanying letter notifying him of an
opportunity to present the intelligence
community's views and a hearing three
days later the Director of Central
Intelligence mr. Colby
appeared accompanied by appropriate
officials to present any specific
objections he might have his response
was specific
but sweeping he objected to everything
no matter how it was worded and no
matter how impossible it would be to
identify a country a source or an
operational method
mr. Colby's responses seemed to end any
good-faith efforts to work out mutually
acceptable release of information but
the committee made one more effort the
three statements were rewritten making
them even more general than before names
of countries were taken out only gross
dollar totals were used and innumerable
generic descriptions were inserted in
one case far less remained than had
appeared in newspaper articles
attributed to high executive branch
officials in a hearing the next day mr.
Colby still objected to the release of
anything two of the three statements
were approved by the committee for
release this meant that all the
materials had to be forwarded to the
president for a decision on whether
release would be detrimental to the
national security the president of
course turned to CIA for guidance more
than three weeks later the chairman was
informed in writing by the president
that the committee could not implement
its decision to release the two
statements incredibly the president's
letter was classified secret the secret
stamp was unnecessary because there were
no facts at all about the covert
projects in his letter the types of
projects at issue were not even
mentioned the letter was simply a
rhetorical pronouncement of how
important confidentiality is and how
telling the American people what their
government is doing in these matters
would harm our best interests it should
be noted that one of the items which
allegedly would harm this nation's
security if made public had already been
made public by dr. Kissinger
[Music]
this is our hidden history
you